Docs, of the implementation as it is right this moment (#51)
nodejs/ecmascript-modules: doc/api/esm.md

<!--name=esm-->

Node.js contains support for ES Modules based upon the
[Node.js EP for ES Modules][] and the [ecmascript-modules implementation][].

Expect major changes in the implementation including interoperability support,
specifier resolution, and default behavior.

## Enabling

<!-- type=misc -->

The `--experimental-modules` flag can be used to enable support for
ECMAScript modules (ES modules).

## Running Node.js with an ECMAScript Module

There are a few ways to start Node.js with an ES module as its input.

### Initial entry point with an <code>.mjs</code> extension

A file ending with `.mjs` passed to Node.js as an initial entry point will be
loaded as an ES module.

```sh
node --experimental-modules my-app.mjs
```

### <code>--type=module</code> / <code>-m</code> flag

Files ending with `.js` or `.mjs`, or lacking any extension,
will be loaded as ES modules when the `--type=module` flag is set.
This flag also has a shorthand alias `-m`.

```sh
node --experimental-modules --type=module my-app.js
# or
node --experimental-modules -m my-app.js
```

> For completeness there is also `--type=commonjs`, for explicitly running a `.js`

Reviewer: should this perhaps be it's own title similar to the above one?

Author: We discussed that, and we were leaning toward no because the overall section is “how to start an ES module program”. Note that `--type` gets its own more straightforward documentation in `cli.md`.

file as CommonJS. This is the default behavior if `--type` or `-m` is
unspecified.

> The `--type=module` or `-m` flags can also be used to tell Node.js to treat as

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `--type=module` or `-m` flags can also be used to configure Node.js to treat as
```

In general I think it is better to talk about configuring rather than telling. It is a bit more accurate imho

an ES module input sent in via `--eval` or `--print` (or `-e` or `-p`) or piped
to Node.js via `STDIN`.

```sh
node --experimental-modules --type=module --eval \
  "import { sep } from 'path'; console.log(sep);"

echo "import { sep } from 'path'; console.log(sep);" | \
  node --experimental-modules --type=module
```

### <code>package.json</code> <code>"type"</code> field

Files ending with `.js` or `.mjs`, or lacking any extension,
will be loaded as ES modules when the nearest parent `package.json` file
contains a top-level field `"type"` with a value of `"module"`.

The nearest parent `package.json` is defined as the first `package.json` found

> when searching in the current folder, that folder’s parent, and so on up

Reviewer: ```suggestion
by searching recursively from the current folder until the root of the volume is reached.
```

Author: In my experience, recursive file system searching always searches _down,_ from the current folder down into all subfolders below. This goes up.

Reviewer 2: Tools that look for config always search recursively upwards - I don't think a direction is implied by "recursive" as much as by "what you're searching for" - so maybe adding `upwards` here would clarify?

Author: I’m thinking of shell commands like `cp -r`. I think users are probably more familiar with recursive meaning “here and all below” than upwards.

Babel describes how it searches for `.babelrc` [this way](https://babeljs.io/docs/en/config-files#file-relative-configuration):

> Babel loads `.babelrc` (and `.babelrc.js` / `package.json#babel`) files by searching up the directory structure starting from the “filename” being compiled

Reviewer 2: given that package.json, eslintrc, babelrc, nvmrc, and most other rc files recursively search upwards, i don't think it's productive to argue about our differing subjective opinions about what users are more familiar with. What's objective is that "recursive searching" does *not* imply a direction.

Would the simple change of "recursively" to "recursively upwards" in myles' suggestion suffice?

Author: I don’t think the word “recursive,” whether up or down, makes this any easier to understand; and for some segment of the audience it will make it more confusing. I think for that reason we should go with simpler language.

> until the root of the volume is reached.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

<!-- eslint-skip -->
```js
// package.json
{
  "type": "module"
}
```

```sh
# In same folder as above package.json
node --experimental-modules my-app.js # Runs as ES module
```

If the nearest parent `package.json` lacks a `"type"` field, or contains
`"type": "commonjs"`, extensionless and `.js` files are treated as CommonJS.
If the volume root is reached and no `package.json` is found,

> Node.js behaves the same as if it had found a `package.json` with no `"type"`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Node.js defers to the deafult, a `package.json` with no `"type"`
```

field.

## Package Scope and File Extensions

> 

Reviewer: I found the copy here a bit confusing... I'm also struggling to come up with something better.

`A package scope is defined as all children of a folder with a package.json that do not themselves have an additional package.json`

I think the above is equally confusing though sigh...

Author: It’s not just “all children,” it’s also the folder that the `package.json` itself is in.

A folder containing a `package.json` file, and all subfolders below that
folder down until the next folder containing another `package.json`, is
considered a _package scope_. The `"type"` field defines how `.js` and
extensionless files should be treated within a particular `package.json` file’s
package scope. Every package in a project’s `node_modules` folder contains its
own `package.json` file, so each project’s dependencies have their own package
scopes. A `package.json` lacking a `"type"` field is treated as if it contained
`"type": "commonjs"`.

The package scope applies not only to initial entry points (`node
--experimental-modules my-app.js`) but also to files referenced by `import`
statements and `import()` expressions.

```js

> // my-app.js, in an ES module package scope because there is a package.json

Reviewer: it might be good to have a quick ascii diagram of the filesystem

Author: Like this? https://github.com/GeoffreyBooth/node-import-file-specifier-resolution-proposal/#example

cc @SMotaal

import './node_modules/commonjs-package/index.js';
// Loaded as CommonJS since ./node_modules/commonjs-package/package.json
// lacks a "type" field or contains "type": "commonjs"
```

Files ending with `.mjs` are always loaded as ES modules regardless of package
scope.

Files ending with `.cjs` are always loaded as CommonJS regardless of package
scope.

```js
import './legacy-file.cjs';
// Loaded as CommonJS since .cjs is always loaded as CommonJS

import 'commonjs-package/src/index.mjs';
// Loaded as ES module since .mjs is always loaded as ES module
```

You can use the `.mjs` and `.cjs` extensions to mix types within the same
package scope:

- Within a `"type": "module"` package scope, Node.js can be instructed to
  interpret a particular file as CommonJS by naming it with a `.cjs` extension
  (since both `.js` and `.mjs` files are treated as ES modules within a
  `"module"` package scope).

- Within a `"type": "commonjs"` package scope, Node.js can be instructed to
  interpret a particular file as an ES module by naming it with an `.mjs`
  extension (since both `.js` and `.cjs` files are treated as CommonJS within a
  `"commonjs"` package scope).

## Package Entry Points

> When a `package.json` contains `"type": "module"`, its `"main"` field defines

Reviewer: if you have a .cjs file in the main it will load as CJS afaik

Author: Yes, this surprised me in your searching PR. I thought otherwise when I wrote this. Will update.

The nearest parent `package.json` is defined as the first `package.json` found
when searching in the current folder, that folder’s parent, and so on up
until the root of the volume is reached.

<!-- eslint-skip -->
```js
// package.json
{
  "type": "module"
}
```

```sh
# In same folder as above package.json
node --experimental-modules my-app.js # Runs as ES module
```

If the nearest parent `package.json` lacks a `"type"` field, or contains
`"type": "commonjs"`, extensionless and `.js` files are treated as CommonJS.
If the volume root is reached and no `package.json` is found,
Node.js defers to the deafult, a `package.json` with no `"type"`
field.

## Package Scope and File Extensions

A folder containing a `package.json` file, and all subfolders below that
folder down until the next folder containing another `package.json`, is
considered a _package scope_. The `"type"` field defines how `.js` and
extensionless files should be treated within a particular `package.json` file’s
package scope. Every package in a project’s `node_modules` folder contains its
own `package.json` file, so each project’s dependencies have their own package

> scopes. A `package.json` lacking a `"type"` field is treated as if it contained

Reviewer 3: This isn't quite true - because we check the extension and throw on conflicts when using "type", while when there is no type there are no conflict errors.

Author: We only throw on conflicts for initial entry points. I was referring to `import` statements of files within scopes here, though I acknowledge that I didn’t make that explicit 😄.

Do we need to document the cases for which we error?

Author: I rewrote the flags sections as part of https://github.com/nodejs/ecmascript-modules/blob/525e8c9b5d0acc7b8b7895f7ea65b592fdf3e2bd/doc/api/cli.md#--typetype--m--a

>    1. Throw an _Invalid Package Configuration_ error.
> 1. Return the parsed JSON source of the file at _pjsonURL_.

> 

Reviewer 3: Was this section intended to be removed?

Author: Crap. That must’ve gotten lost in a rebase.

Author: Wait, no, it was just moved up. The idea was to have the spec be last.
